Edsa Carousel
The EDSA Carousel also known as EDSA Busway is a bus rapid transit (BRT) system that connects to a number of bus routes in Metro Manila. It is located alongside EDSA and other roads, traveling on a designated lane, and is separated from regular traffic for the majority of its length by concrete barriers and steel bollards on the innermost lane. EDSA Busway is the most efficient, affordable, comfortable and safe bus service in Metro Manila, Philippines.

Due to the limited capacity constraints imposed by the general community quarantine in Metro Manila as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, interim operations started on June 1, 2020, replacing the prior bus routes along EDSA. Full operations then started on July 1, 2020. Certain stops are momentarily served by bus stops on the curbside even though they are primarily intended to be served by stops along the median.

Under the direction of the Department of Transportation (DOTr) and Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), the line is run by the Mega Manila Consortium Corporation and ES Transport and Partners Consortium.

Opening
Passenger volumes started to rise as a result of limitations being gradually loosened and an increase in the number of passengers. Free rides for the EDSA Carousel were promised for the remaining months of the previous president Rodrigo Duterte’s term in response to rising inflation and global market fluctuations that affected currency prices. Notwithstanding budgetary worries, free rides were extended under Bongbong Marcos’ administration until the end of 2022. However, the free rides created issues with ridership capacity and the number of buses available to service passengers during rush hours.

To further enhance its services, proposals to privatize the EDSA Carousel’s operations were investigated. Such suggestions should be “explored swiftly,” according to Transportation Minister Jaime Bautista, who is receptive to them.

Ridership
130,238,608 commuters have used the line since it opened in June 2020, which is within the period from June 2020 to November 2022. Overall ridership increased from 41,000 to 60,000 people per day on average from June to December 2020 and continued to increase in 2021, reaching a daily average of 129,000 passengers with a record-breaking 160,000 passengers in June 2021. Total ridership in 2021 totaled 47,104,197.

The line’s greatest passenger volume ever was 404,010 on October 24, 2022, while the average daily ridership for the entire year was 389,579. The line carried 80,832,186 passengers, setting a new record for total ridership.

EDSA Carousel Bus Stops
15 bus stops were initially present when the route was temporarily launched, and more stops were later added. As of December 31, 2022, 21 bus stops are currently in use. The entire route is serviced by 751 approved buses and 87 operators.

List of EDSA Carousel Bus Stops
Name	Type	Location
Monumento	Median	Caloocan
Bagong Barrio	Median	Caloocan
Balintawak	Median	Quezon City
Kaingin Road	Median	Quezon City
Roosevelt	Median	Quezon City
North Avenue	Median	Quezon City
Quezon Avenue	Median	Quezon City
Mega Q-Mart	Median	Quezon City
Main Avenue	Median	Quezon City
Santolan	Median	Quezon City
Ortigas	Median	Mandaluyong
Guadalupe	Median	Makati
Buendia	Median	Makati
Ayala	Curbside (NB)	Makati
One Ayala Terminal	Terminal (SB)	Makati
Tramo	Median	Pasay
Taft Avenue	Median	Pasay
Roxas Boulevard	Median	Pasay
SM Mall of Asia (MOA)	Curbside	Pasay
Macapagal – Bradco Avenue	Curbside	Parañaque
City of Dreams	Curbside	Parañaque
Ayala Malls Manila Bay	Curbside	Parañaque
PITX Terminal	Terminal	Parañaque
List of EDSA Busway Carousel Bus Stops

Bus Route
EDSA Carousel Bus Stops
As of December 31, 2022, 21 bus stops are now in use. The route had 15 bus stops at its original interim launch, and further stops were added in the months that followed. The entire route is serviced by 87 operators and 751 approved buses .

EDSA CAROUSEL ROUTE (NORTH BOUND)
---
PITX
City of Dreams, Parañaque City
DFA, Diosdado Macapagal Blvd.,  Lungsod ng Pasay
Roxas Blvd Eastbound
Taft Median Bus Stop (Eastbound), EDSA
MRT-3 Ayala Station, EDSA
EDSA Carousel Buendia Median Stop
EDSA Guadalupe Median Stop
EDSA Ortigas Median Stop
MRT Santolan-Annapolis Median Stop
Main Ave. Median Stop
EDSA Nepa Q-Mart Median Stop
EDSA Quezon Ave. Median Stop
North Avenue Median Stop
EDSA Munoz Median Stop
Balintawak LRT 1, Epifanio de los Santos Ave., Quezon City
Bagong Barrio, Caloocan Median Stop
MCU Median Stop, EDSA, Monumento
---
EDSA CAROUSEL ROUTE (SOUTH BOUND)
---
MCU Median Stop, EDSA, Monumento
Bagong Barrio, Caloocan Median Stop
Kaingin Road Bus Stop, EDSA, Epifanio de los Santos Ave., Quezon City
EDSA Munoz Median Stop
North Avenue Median Stop
EDSA Quezon Ave. Median Stop
EDSA Nepa Q-Mart Median Stop
Main Ave. Median Stop
MRT Santolan-Annapolis Median Stop
EDSA Ortigas Median Stop
EDSA Guadalupe Median Stop
EDSA Carousel Buendia Median Stop
One Ayala Terminal
Tramo Carousel Station
Taft Median Bus Stop (Westbound), EDSA
Roxas Blvd Westbound
SM Mall of Asia, Pasay City
DFA – Office of Consular Affairs
Ayala Malls By the Bay Terminal
PITX
---
EDSA Carousel Fare Matrix (Southbound)
EDSA Bus Carousel southbound bus route (Monumento to PITX) has 21 stops and the prices range anywhere from PHP 15.00 to PHP 75.50. The minimum fare is PHP15 for first four kilometers and P2. 65 for every succeeding kilometer. Total Fare (Monumento to PITX PHP 75.50).

SOUTH BOUND	BUS STOP	FARE
ORIGIN	Monumento	–
Bagong Barrio	15
Balintawak	15
Kaingin	15
Roosevelt	15
North Avenue	15.75
Quezon Avenue	19.25
Nepa Q. Mart	23.5
Main Avenue	28
Santolan	29.75
Ortigas	36.5
Guadalupe	42.75
Buendia	48
One Ayala	50.25
Tramo	58.75
Taft Avenue	59.5
Roxas Boulevard	62
MoA	64.25
DFA	68
Ayala Malls Manila Bay	71.75
DESTINATION	PITX	75.5
---
EDSA Carousel Fare Matrix (Northbound)
EDSA Bus Carousel northbound route has 19 bus stops from PITX to Monumento and the prices range anywhere from PHP 15.00 to PHP 73. The minimum fare is PHP15 for first four kilometers and P2. 65 for every succeeding kilometer. Total Fare (PITX to Monumento PHP 73).

NORTH BOUND	BUS STOP	FARE
ORIGIN	PITX	–
City of Dreams	15
DFA	15
Roxas Boulevard	15
Taft Avenue	15
Ayala	24
Buendia	26.5
Guadalupe	31.5
Ortigas	38
Santolan	44.75
Main Avenue	46.5
Nepa Q. Mart	51.25
Quezon Avenue	55.5
North Avenue	59
Roosevelt	63.5
Kaingin	65.75
Balintawak	67.75
Bagong Barrio	69.5
DESTINATION	Monumento	73
---

EDSA CAROUSEL POLICY

Starting yesterday, November 13, 2023, higher fines will be imposed on those who violate the EDSA Busway policy.

Here is the list of new violations enforced in the EDSA bus lane:

First offense – P5,000

Second offense – 10,000 / 1 month suspension of driver's license / Subject to road safety seminar

Third offense – P20,000 / 1 year suspension of driver's license

Fourth offense – P30,000 / Driver's license will be cancelled

Reminder of the Department of Transportation (DOTr) under the leadership of Secretary Jaime Bautista, only buses, ambulances and other vehicles used to respond to emergencies are authorized to pass through the inner lane of EDSA.
---
EDSA BUSWAY ADVISORY BDMS
In a bid to further enhance the public commuting experience brought by the busway system, the EDSA Busway will now be under the monitoring of the Bus Management and Dispatch System (BMDS) of the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA).

Through the partnership with MMDA, this innovative system will improve the commuters’ experience by introducing a more systematic monitoring of the number of units plying the EDSA Busway. This ensures a well-managed flow of buses, resulting in smoother journeys and reduced congestion.

In addition, the BMDS enables comprehensive driver monitoring. Using QR codes as a contactless method, designated Dispatching Officers from the MMDA, stationed at PITX and Monumento, can efficiently scan drivers’ unique QR codes. This grants access to crucial information, including unsettled violations, ensuring a high level of accountability.
---
April 25, 2023
The Parañaque Integrated Terminal Exchange (PITX) is providing free rides on its new Aseana City Loop route until May 17. Commuters can take advantage of this offer from Monday to Friday between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. The boarding point is Gate 7, Bay 23 of the PITX terminal. This route includes stops at various popular locations such as Ayala Malls Manila Bay,  SM Mall of Asia, and Aseana Power Station, among others. The PITX aims to provide an efficient and hassle-free commute for its passengers, and this free ride offer is a step towards achieving that goal.
---
April 11, 2023
MMDA implements the Expanded Unified Vehicle Volume Reduction Program (UVVRP) or number coding scheme from 7 am – 10 am and 5 pm – 8 pm from Monday to Friday, except during holidays.

Under this, vehicles are not allowed to travel on Metro Manila roads based on the last digit of the license plates in the said coding hours. Plates ending 1 and 2 are covered by coding on Mondays, 3 and 4 on Tuesdays, 5 and 6 on Wednesdays, 7 and 8 on Thursdays and 9 and 0 on Fridays.

Public vehicles, transport network vehicles services (TNVS), motorcycles, garbage trucks, marked government vehicles, petrol trucks, media marked vehicles, fire trucks, ambulances, and vehicles carrying perishable and/or essential goods are exempted from coding.

Additionally, you can board the EDSA Carousel Busway for convenient and safe travel.
---
April 3, 2023
The EDSA Busway Stations will remain operational 24/7 during the observance of the Holy Week 2023.

Pickup and drop-off points of the EDSA Busway near MRT-3 stations will also be accessible to all passengers.
---
March 31, 2023 
IMPORTANT REMINDER:

MRT-3 stations near the pick-up and drop-off points of  EDSA Bus Carousel will remain accessible during Holy Week for passengers to pass through.

This is despite MRT-3’s temporary suspension of operations from April 6 to April 9, to accommodate the rail line’s annual Holy Week maintenance activities.

Stations that will remain accessible to EDSA Bus Carousel commuters are: North Avenue station, Quezon Avenue station, Santolan station, Ortigas station, Guadalupe station, and Buendia station.

Commuters are advised to use alternative transportations, such as the EDSA Bus Carousel, over Easter Week.

MRT-3 will resume regular operations on April 10.
---
March 31, 2023 
Provincial buses will be permitted on EDSA from April 6 through April 10, 2023, to accommodate the anticipated influx of travelers for Holy Week.

Provincial buses from North Luzon must arrive at the bus terminals at Cubao, Quezon City, to end their journey.

Provincial buses from South Luzon will arrive at the Pasay City bus terminals to end their journey.

This would assure commuters’ comfort and convenience as well as enable the provincial buses to carry the anticipated large number of people traveling to the provinces for the Lenten season.
---
March 22, 2023
MASS TRANSPORTATION IS A TOP PRIORITY—this is the first highlighted strategy set out in the Chapter 12 of the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028: Expand and Upgrade Infrastructure.

Mass transportation systems, such as railways, road-based, and ferry systems, will be developed in metropolitan areas.

The roll-out of the planned rail infrastructure projects will be pursued aggressively. Railways will be expanded from north to south, and from east to west, connecting growth nodes and strategic infrastructure. Inter-city rails will be built in metropolitan regions across the country, and policies will be espoused to ensure availability of highly specialized spare parts and supplies.

Moreover, bus rapid transit systems will be adopted to enhance the efficient use of public transport vehicles and existing road spaces. Existing ferry systems will be upgraded and other coastal and inland waterways transport systems will be established as an alternative sustainable transport mode, to further improve the connectivity of ports to the national transport system.

To remark, President Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr., signed Executive Order No. 14 officially approving and adopting the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028 —the country’s blueprint for social and economic development for the next six (6) years.

Know more, learn more, as we BUILD BETTER MORE! Source: DOTR Page
---
March 22, 2023
HEADS UP, COMMUTERS!

The newly-inaugurated Buendia Station at  EDSA Busway will open this coming Monday, 22 November 2021!

Last week, 11 November 2021, Buendia Station in EDSA was officially inaugurated alongside the opening of a new footbridge at the intersection of EDSA and Gil Puyat Avenue (Buendia) in Makati City. This is expected to ease pedestrian traffic and make the ride and drop of commuters coming and going to the said city safer and seamless, especially since it is connected to the MRT-3. facility.

The said inauguration was led by Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) Chairman Benhur Abalos Jr. together with Department of Transportation (DOTr) Assistant Secretary for Road Transport and Infrastructure Mark Steven C. Pastor and Assistant Secretary for Special Concerns and I-ACT Chief Manuel Gonzales.

Currently, there are 13 operational bus stations in the median lane of EDSA Busway including Buendia. Source: DOTR Page
---
